iti tvayi rasākulaṃ ramitavallabhe vallavā:
kadāpi puramambikāmiturambikākānane |
sametya bhavatā samaṃ niśi niṣevya divyotsavaṃ
sukhaṃ suṣupuragrasīdvrajapamugranāgastadā ||1||
iti tvayi	in this manner (when) Thou
rasa-ākulaṃ	in bliss immersed
ramita-vallabhe	were entertaining the Gopikaas
vallavā: kadāpi	(at that time) the Gopas once
puram-ambikā-kamitu:-	(to) the temple of Ambikaa's husband (Shiva)
ambikā-kānane	in the Ambika (named) forest
sametya bhavatā samaṃ	going along with Thee
niśi niṣevya	in the night having performed
divya-utsavaṃ	the divine festival
sukhaṃ suṣupu:-	happily slept
agrasīt-vrajapam-	swallowed Nanda Gopa
ugranāga:-tadā	a fierce snake then
In this manner, as Thou were entertaining the Gopikaas and they were immersed in bliss, the Gopas went to the temple of Lord Shiva, Ambikaa's (Paarvati's) husband. Thou went along with them to the temple which was in the forest named Ambikaa. After the divine festival had been performed, they all slept happily in the night. Then a fierce snake swallowed Nanda Gopa.
samunmukhamatholmukairabhihate'pi tasmin balā-
damuñcati bhavatpade nyapati pāhi pāhīti tai: |
tadā khalu padā bhavān samupagamya pasparśa taṃ
babhau sa ca nijāṃ tanuṃ samupasādya vaidyadharīm ||2||
samunmukham-	who was looking up
atha-ulmukai:-	then with burning logs of wood
abhihate-api-tasmin	being thrashed even, he
balāt-amuñcati	from his hold did not release
bhavat-pade nyapati	on Thy feet fell (the Gopas)
pāhi pāhi-iti tai:	save save, thus by them (was said)
tadā khalu	then indeed
padā bhavān	by foot Thou
samupagamya	going near
pasparśa taṃ	touched him
babhau sa ca	became he and
nijāṃ tanuṃ	his own body
samupasādya	attaining
vaidyadharīm	Vidyaadharee (form)
The fierce snake was looking up. In spite of being thrashed with burning logs of wood, it did not loose hold of his prey. The Gopas fell on Thy feet and prayed for protection. Then indeed Thou went near and touched him with Thy foot, and he became his own body and attained the former form of Vidyaadharee.
sudarśanadhara prabho nanu sudarśanākhyo'smyahaṃ
munīn kvacidapāhasaṃ ta iha māṃ vyadhurvāhasam |
bhavatpadasamarpaṇādamalatāṃ gato'smītyasau
stuvan nijapadaṃ yayau vrajapadaṃ ca gopā mudā ||3||
sudarśanadhara prabho	Wielder of Sudarshana, O Lord!
nanu sudarśana-ākhya:-	indeed Sudarshana named
asmi-ahaṃ	am I
munīn kvacit-	the sages once
apāhasaṃ	(I) ridiculed
te-iha māṃ	they here me
vyadhu:-vāhasam	made a python
bhavat-pada-	Thy feet
samarpaṇāt-	by contact
amalatāṃ gata:-asmi	purification reached (have) I
iti-asau stuvan	thus he praising
nijapadaṃ yayau	(to) his own abode went
vrajapadaṃ ca	and to Vraja
gopā mudā	the Gopas (went) happily
O Lord! Wielder of Sudarshana! I am Sudarshana by name. Having sinned the sages for ridiculing them, they cursed me to remain here as a python. I have reached purification by the touch of Thy feet.' Thus praising Thee, he went back to his abode, while the Gopas also happily returned to Vraja.
kadāpi khalu sīriṇā viharati tvayi strījanai-
rjahāra dhanadānuga: sa kila śaṅkhacūḍo'balā: |
atidrutamanudrutastamatha muktanārījanaṃ
rurojitha śiromaṇiṃ halabhṛte ca tasyādadā: ||4||
kadāpi khalu	once indeed
sīriṇā viharati	with Balaraam strolling about
tvayi strījanai:-	when Thou were (and) with the women folk
jahāra dhanada-anuga:	kidnapped, Kuber's emissary
sa kila	he indeed
śaṅkhacūḍa:-	Shankhachooda
abalā:	the women
atidrutam-	very hastily
anudruta:-tam-atha	(Thou) pursuing him, then
mukta-nārī-janam	releasing the women folk
rurojitha	(Thou) killed him
śiromaṇim	(and) the crest pearl
halabhṛte ca	to Balaraam and
tasya-adadā:	his (Shankhacooda's) gave
Once indeed in Balaraam's company and with the women folk Thou were strolling about. Shankhachooda, an emissary of Kubera, kidnapped the women. Thou hastily pursued him and killed him and liberated the women. Thou gave the crest pearl of Shankhachooda to Thy brother Balaraam.
dineṣu ca suhṛjjanaissaha vaneṣu līlāparaṃ
manobhavamanoharaṃ rasitaveṇunādāmṛtam |
bhavantamamarīdṛśāmamṛtapāraṇādāyinaṃ
vicintya kimu nālapan virahatāpitā gopikā: ||5||
dineṣu ca	and all during the day
suhṛt-janai:-saha	with the friends
vaneṣu līlāparaṃ	in the forest engaged in play
manobhava-manoharaṃ	enchanting Cupid
rasita-veṇu-	lusciously, the flute's
nāda-amṛtam	notes flowing like nectar
bhavantam-	Thee
amarī-dṛśām-	to the celestial damsels' sight
amṛta-pāraṇā-dāyinaṃ	nectar drink giving
vicintya	thinking about (all this)
kimu na-ālapan	what all did not lament
viraha-tāpitā	separation pangs suffering
gopikā:	the Gopikaas
During the day Thou were engaged in play with friends in the forest. Enchanting even Cupid, Thou played the flute with luscious notes flowing like nectar. Thy sight was like a drink of nectar to the eyes of the celestial damsels. Thinking about all this the Gopikaas suffered pangs of separation and what all lamentations did they not give in to.
bhojarājabhṛtakastvatha kaścit kaṣṭaduṣṭapathadṛṣṭirariṣṭa: |
niṣṭhurākṛtirapaṣṭhuninādastiṣṭhate sma bhavate vṛṣarūpī ||6||
bhojarāja-bhṛtaka:-	Kamsaa's emissary
tu-atha kaścit	then some one
kaṣṭa-duṣṭa-	cruel and evil
patha-dṛṣṭi:-ariṣṭa:	ways looking for, (named) Arishta
niṣṭhura-ākṛti:-	terrific in appearance
apaṣṭhu-nināda:-	(and) horrible bellowings
tiṣṭhate sma bhavate	stood before Thee
vṛṣarūpī	in the form of a bull
Once, some emissary of Kansa, always looking for ways to do cruel and evil deeds, Arishta by name, terrific in appearance, bellowing horribly, in the form of a bull stood before Thee.
śākvaro'tha jagatīdhṛtihārī mūrtimeṣa bṛhatīṃ pradadhāna: |
paṅktimāśu parighūrṇya paśūnāṃ chandasāṃ nidhimavāpa bhavantam ||7||
śākvara:-atha	(this) bull then
jagatī-dhṛti-hārī	(who was) the world's peace plunderer
mūrtim-eṣa	in a form, he
bṛhatīṃ pradadhāna:	(which was) huge assumed
paṅktim-āśu	the herd soon
parighūrṇya	driving away
paśūnāṃ	of the cows
chandasām nidhim-	of the Veda's repository (Thee)
avāpa bhavantam	approached Thee
Then this bull who was the plunderer of the peace of the world, he assumed a form which was huge and driving away the herds of cows, soon approached Thee who are repository of Vedas.
tuṅgaśṛṅgamukhamāśvabhiyantaṃ saṃgṛhayya rabhasādabhiyaṃ tam |
bhadrarūpamapi daityamabhadraṃ mardayannamadaya: suralokam ||8||
tuṅga-śṛṅga-mukham-	raising the horns and head
āśu-abhiyantaṃ	hastily rushing
saṃgṛhayya rabhasāt-	catching swiftly
abhiyaṃ tam	fearlessly, him
bhadra-rūpam-api	(who was) in an auspicious form, though
daityam-abhadram	(he was) an Asura inauspicious
mardayan-amadaya:	killing, (Thou) delighted
suralokam	the gods
Raising his horns and head he was rushing hastily towards Thee. Thou caught hold of him swiftly and fearlessly who was an inauspicious Asura, though he was in an auspicious form of a bull. Thou then crushed him to death and so delighted the gods.
citramadya bhagavan vṛṣaghātāt susthirā'jani vṛṣasthitirurvyām |
vardhate ca vṛṣacetasi bhūyān moda ityabhinuto'si suraistvam ||9||
citram-adya	surprisingly now (today)
bhagavan	O Lord!
vṛṣa-ghātāt	by the bull's killing
susthirā-ajani	very firm has become
vṛṣa-sthiti:-	the righteousness (Dharma's) status
urvyām	on the earth
vardhate ca	and is increasing
vṛṣa-cetasi	in Indra's mind
bhūyān moda	great joy
iti-abhinuta:-asi	thus praised were
surai:-tvam	by the gods Thou
"O Lord! It is amazing that today by the killing of the bull, the status of righteousness (Dharma) is strengthened on the earth. The great joy in Indra's mind is also enhanced." Thus Thou were praised by the gods.
aukṣakāṇi paridhāvata dūraṃ vīkṣyatāmayamihokṣavibhedī |
itthamāttahasitai: saha gopairgehagastvamava vātapureśa ||10||
aukṣakāṇi	O bulls
paridhāvata dūraṃ	run away far
vīkṣyatām-	see
ayam-iha-	this here
ukṣavibhedī	the bull slayer
ittham-ātta-hasitai:	thus making jokes
saha gopai:-	with the Gopas
gehaga:-tvam-	went home Thou
ava vātapureśa	save me O Lord of Guruvaayur
O bulls! Run far away. See here is this slayer of bulls.' Thou went home with the Gopas who were joking in this manner. O Lord of Guruvaayur! Save me.